## Recipe Helper
Searching for recipes online yields pages upon pages of results, all for the same dish. Recipe Helper takes the guesswork out of finding recipes online by condensing pages of results into a single archetypal recipe and a helpful statistical summary. Filtering down to just the essentials gives you the freedom to compare, experiment, and explore in the kitchen. Recipe Helper interprets recipe text and nutrition information to quantify recipes as proportional compositions by ingredient, find families of recipes for the same dish, and scores each recipe for typicality in it's family. I developed Recipe Helper's algorithms and metrics for the particular problem of interpreting and analyzing recipes, but they are similar to methods commonly used in clustering and natural language processing.

### Motivation
When I want to cook something I've never made before, the first thing I do is look up a recipe. Most of the time, I type to name of the food into a search engine, and just like that I have recipes. Dozens, if not hundreds of recipes. Far more than I would care to read and compare. Of those, which ones are good? Which ones are the easiest to prepare? Which can I make with the ingredients I have on hand? I usually deal with this problem by skimming only the first few results and settling on one arbitrarily. This is not a thorough or rigorous comparison and it adds extra work before I can get into the kitchen. This project takes an algorithmic approach to gain the same insights that a human might gain by comparing various recipes for the same food.

### Data
I collected over 10,000 recipes from Edamam, a recipe search API (https://developer.edamam.com/). Search results included the recipe lines from the original text of the recipe as well as detailed nutrition information. Restrictions on the free-tier access to the API limited me to 100 results per search term, requiring a list of over 100 recipe search terms. Many of my search terms were for types of cookies, because I believed that would be an exemplary data set for developing my project. As a class, cookie recipes have a great deal of variety, but the scope of ingredients is mostly limited to those reasonably used in baking.

### Methodology
#### Recipe Interpretation
Ingredients in each recipe line were identified by matching words and bigrams to curated hierarchical list of ingredient keywords. The proportion of total recipe mass for each ingredient was calculated using weights from nutrition information. After processing each recipe is represented as vector of ingredient proportions.

#### Recipe Aggregation
Identifying families of recipes for the same dish can be accomplished by matching a recipe title to a general recipe name: e.g. all recipes that have the words "chocolate chip cookies" in the title are chocolate chip cookie recipes. The approach worked well in most cases I tested. An alternative method I explored was starting with any single example recipe growing a group agglomeratively from that starting point, iteratively adding new recipes that are similar to the group until an arbitrary group size is reached (pairwise similarity in this case being defined as a weighted average of cosine similarity between ingredient proportion vectors and Jaccard similarity between ingredient sets). Unfortunately groups formed this way sometimes included recipe titles which did not describe the same dish.

#### Typicality Scoring
A central recipe for a family was identified by scoring the typicality of every recipe in the family, and selecting the most typical. Typicality was defined as a weighted average between the mean in-family use frequency of each ingredient used in the recipe and the cosine similarity between the nonzero components of the recipe's ingredient proportion vector and the family mean for those non-zero features.
